---
title: 3D Printing at the Library
permalink: "/getting_started/"
layout: nosidebar
---

# Printing at the EDH Library 3D Print Lab
All projects must be submitted in person with a 3D Print Lab Volunteer.

3D printing begins with a digital 3D model and builds it into a solid form,
layer by layer. This differs from traditional manufacturing, wherein material
is either shaped by a pre-made mold or removed from a larger piece of base
material. Because of this, 3D printing is also known as additive manufacturing.

There are many, many types of 3D printers on the market, ranging from simple
home models to complex machines for professional use. Different printers work
with a variety of materials and printing methods. The El Dorado Hills Library
uses the Printrbot Simple Metal.

## So where do you begin?

### Start with a digital 3D model

Before you can print your project, you have to design the model that will tell
the printer what to make. Various CAD (Computer-Aided Design) programs can be
used to create and edit models. All projects submitted to the EDH Library 3D
Print Lab must be in .stl, .obj, .dae, or .amf format.

The EDH Library 3D Print lab recommends 123D Design, which can be downloaded for
free.
Beginners might also like TinkerCAD, which can be used in-browser for free. See
our full list of recommended programs and reading for more information.

### Load your project into a slicer.

Slicing programs break 3D models down into 2D layers for the printer. The
printer then extrudes material to match those 2D  layers, stacking them on top
of one another until they form a 3D object.

Loading your project into a slicer before submitting it will tell you
approximately how long your print job will take. Print jobs submitted to the
EDH Library 3D Print Lab may not exceed 4 hours.

The EDH Library 3D Print lab uses Cura slicing software. Download the program
for free and select 'Printrbot Simple Metal' as your printer to preview your
print job.

A slicer will also help you to determine possible design flaws in your project.
Breaking down a model into layers will show if an element of the object will
need additional support to print properly. Supports can be added in CAD
programs, and when the print is complete, they can be cut off for a clean
appearance.

### Send your file to the printer.

You might think that all of your hard work is done and it's all up to the
printer now. However, 3D printing is not a point-and-click process. Numerous
settings, from temperature to speed to layer thickness, need to be adjusted for
an optimal print. Because of this, only 3D Print Lab volunteers and library
staff may operate the printers.

Some shapes and structures might be better suited to higher or lower speeds;
certain colors of filament handle temperature differently; some objects will
need thinner layers in order to print fine details. On top of this, some print
jobs might require what is called a raft or a brim, a layer of material around
the base that will keep the object stable as it prints (rafts and supports are
easily removed from finished print jobs, so it will not affect the appearance
of your print negatively).

Due to all of these variables, the final print time for your project may be
impacted. If you have questions or concerns about your project, contact 3D Print
 Lab volunteers at the library or <edhl3dprinter@gmail.com>.

If your project was downloaded from a site such as thingiverse.com, or if you
modified one of their pre-existing models, it's likely that the original poster
included specifications for printing. This information can be included in the
project submission form in order to help volunteers ensure the best possible
print for your project.

### Clean up your project and take it home.

3D printers don't always do a perfectly neat job. You may need to cut or sand a
few rough spots for a clean, polished finish. Once that's done, it's time to sit
back and admire your workâ€“ and then plan your next project.
